[MUSIC PLAYING]
WIM: Hello, everyone.
In this optional video, I
want to explain that, really,
in functional languages
there are only functions.
What I want to do is give
you a quick intuition
how we can remove all
the syntactic sugar
from a functional
language and reduce it
to only lambda functions.
So the full elaboration
of how you can do this
is explained in the
article on the site.
We will just cover
the basic ideas.
So let's start with
the let construct.
Suppose we have something
like-- so we a let block,
where we have n
is assigned to 10,
and we define the function
f of x being x plus 1.
And we apply f to n.
So basically the whole
thing should return 11.
So, we want to rewrite this
so that there will only
be lambda functions left.
So the obvious first
rewrite we can do
is rewrite this function
definition of the lambda.
So, very simply.
OK.
So then the next
thing we will do
is, we have a let that
contains two variables,
and we will essentially
do the equivalent
of currying in the let blocks.
So we will transform this let
block in a nest of let blocks.
So what we're doing is--
OK.
So now we have a nested let.
Now we have this let expression,
with just a single variable
here, and we can rewrite this as
a lambda expression as follows.
So I'll just put it
on this side here.
So this whole let
block here is actually
entirely equivalent to a
lambda function applied
to the function that defines f.
So we bind f to this
function, and apply it to n.
So all we have to do is
do the same for other let.
And that's quite simple.
So we take the other
let and transform it
into a lambda expression, which
says, basically, we have n
applied to this construct here.
And apply to 10.
So if we just straighten
it out a bit, we get--
So we have transformed
the whole nested
let into a series of lambdas.
This you can see, it's
entirely equivalent,
but it's a lot
less easy to type,
which is why the let syntax
is available in the language
of course.
So the next thing
we want to do is
see if we can define conditional
expressions, and so on.
And for that we need to define
the values of true and false.
You might wonder,
how can we define
the values of true and false
without having any numbers,
because remember we're
going to use only functions,
so even numbers are
not defined yet.
So it's actually quite easy.
We define true and
false as functions.
So we say true is defined as a
function of two elements, which
returns the first element.
And false is a function
of two elements which
returns the second elements.
And that's all there is to it.
This is our-- this is by
definition, in our system,
true and false.
And now we can use these
values of true and false,
these definitions
to define things
like if then else constructs,
or-- Let's do that next.
So, in if then else--
so that in Haskell it
looks if condition then
if true else if false.
So condition, if
true and if false
are expressions in
their own right,
condition evaluates
to true or false.
So the first thing
is this if then else,
we know it's an expression.
And it's actually just
syntactic sugar for a function,
and we will call this
function if then else.
So we have if then else
condition if true if false.
So this is our first step in
removing some syntactic sugar.
So now with these definitions
for true and false,
it turns out that the
definition of this if then else
is actually quite simple.
It is very simply--
because remember,
condition evaluates
to true or false.
So it must return one
of these two functions.
These are functions of
two elements, that return
either the first or the second.
So if it's this one, then
condition will return this.
If that one, condition
will return that.
So this way, we have
defined if then else.
Neat, huh?
Finally, I want to show
how to define lists.
So let's say we have a
list which is just 1, 2, 3.
We already know from what we've
seen earlier that this bracket
syntax for list is
actually syntactic sugar
for a combination of the cons
operation and the empty list.
So we know that this is
entirely equivalent to saying
1, 2, 3 empty list.
Or written out more explicitly
using the cons function.
So what we have to do now is
define cons and the empty list
using lambda functions
and nothing else.
And we will use the
same trick again
of using-- defining
a function that
returns a function, because we
have nothing else, remember?
So we define cons as a lambda
function of x and xs,
which returns, in its own
right, a function that
operates on x and xs.
So this is-- because we don't
want any syntactic sugar,
so normally cons is of
course a function of x and y.
We've rewritten it as a variable
binding to a lambda expression.
And this lambda
expression in x and xs
returns this
particular function.
So all we need now
is the empty list.
And this is again very simple.
So we define the empty list as
a function of anything to true.
And the reason for this,
why it has to be true,
is because we will
work on from this
and define things like
test for emptiness
of the list, and length
of the list, and so on.
And with this definition the
whole system is consistent.
So in the same fashion
you can define tuples
and then you can go on to define
list operations, recursions,
folds, maps.
And then you can go on
to define numbers simply
by saying that you have a 0, of
some arbitrary starting point,
and then a function that
always defines the next number,
and so on.
All that is explained in
the article in more detail.
But in this way, we can
define our complete language
in terms of nothing else
than lambda functions.
So really, there
are only functions.
OK.